= Vanities

Vanities is a gem for use with a Rails 3/3.1 project that will transform
URLs like this:

  http://example.com/users/1

Into something cool, like this:

  http://example.com/foo

== The Vanity URL Explained

Vanities implements the concept of the "vanity URL".  Similar to a vanity
license plate, it's a unique name or ID chosen by the user that is specific to them.
However, this doesn't necessarily have to be for a user - in theory, any model in your
Rails 3 application can use a vanity URL.

This gem works by redirecting requests for a vanity name - say "foo" - to the object
that owns it.  So for example, visiting example.com/foo would perform a redirect to
example.com/users/1 (assuming a user object with an ID of 1 owned the "foo" vanity).

== Common Use Cases

Some common use cases for something like vanities would be:
* user profiles (www.example.com/users/22829 => www.example.com/bob)
* specific products in an e-commerce system (www.exampleshop.com/products/19920 => www.exampleshop.com/buythis)

== How To Install

Vanities is pretty simple to install.  First, a few requirements and caveats:

=== Requirements

<b>REST-based models</b> - every model with which you want to use vanities MUST be made
a RESTful resource in your routes file (config/routes.rb).  This is absolutely required.

<b>Rails 3</b> - vanities is built on Rails 3 or 3.1.  It might work with older versions of Rails, but
only if you go back and reverse engineer some of the routing stuff, and possibly other things
if using versions of Rails prior to the 2.3.x series. No other versions are supported.

<b>ActiveRecord</b> - vanities needs a table in the database to keep track of the individual
vanity names.  Datamapper and/or -otherorm- isn't/aren't supported out of the box, but the
setup itself is so simple that you could probably reverse-engineer this to use another ORM
if you wanted to.

=== Installation

In your application's Gemfile, add the following line:

  gem 'vanities'

Then in your console/terminal, do:

  bundle install

Next, while still in your terminal/console:

  rails g vanities

You'll see a list of instructions that it'll print out.  Next you'll want to
open up your model that you want to have a vanity URL (say a User model) and add this
line to it to substitute the polymorphic association that does all the magic:

  has_vanity

Finally, do:

  rake db:migrate

And you're all set!

=== A word about routes...

Vanities should be set as the absolute last route in your routes.rb file.  The reason
is because Rails' routing system is set up to take the first route in the file (from the top)
that matches, and stop there.  If a vanity URL that doesn't exist is higher in routing
priority than, say, a user's show action, things are going to be a little funky.

All you need to do is cut and paste the route installed for the vanities controller
from wherever it is in your routes.rb file after installation, and move it to be the
last route in your system.

== Using vanities

Every model that has a call to 'has_vanity' will have a vanity object associated with it.
Each instance of your model will have one - and only one - vanity.  Vanities CANNOT be repeated
across different models.  For example, let's say you have a user with a vanity called "bob", and
a product; you cannot call the product's vanity "bob" as well, as that's already taken by
the aforementioned user.

To set up a vanity for a model, all you need to do is create a vanity.  Say you're in the Rails
console.  This would be as simple as:

  u = User.first
  u.vanity = Vanity.new(:name => "bob")

Finally, you can go to http://localhost:3000/bob to be automatically redirected
to the user's 'show' action.

== About the Tests

Vanities is mostly a convenience gem, nothing more.  It makes use of code already tested by Rails, and
as such, is pretty light on its own tests.  As of version 0.1.3, Vanities includes a test to ensure that
the 'has_vanity' method does work correctly.  <b>I fully welcome any well written tests for Vanities.</b>
Just fork, do your work, and submit a pull request.

=== Running the tests

Download this gem then cd to the right directory:

  cd /path/to/your/gem/install/vanities

Then just use ruby to run the tests:

  ruby test/unit/vanities_test.rb

== What version of ActiveRecord can I use this with?

Vanities should work with ActiveRecord 3.0 and 3.1 just fine.  It *probably* works with older
versions, too. In theory, any version fo ActiveRecord that provides polymorphic associations should work,
as long as the API stays the same. If you have doubts or questions, feel free to run the tests.

== Changelog

*0.1.3* 17 September 2011: Slight refactor based on suggestions from Marc Gayle (@marcgayle) to
allow for + and - characters in routes. Also added basic test to ensure 'has_vanity' is loaded into
ActiveRecord as an available method, and that it works to provide the polymorphic association
necessary to make everything work.

*0.1.2* 20 March 2011: Slight refactor to make the vanities controller render a 404 if it can't
find a vanity object.  Small documentation update about routes (make sure vanities is
the LAST route in your routes.rb file).